---
layout: post
title: San Francisco Housing Evictions and Divestment
---
##Permits and Evictions in San Francisco Neighborhoods
#Is there any correlation between neighborhoods with higher eviction rates and divestment?


	It is known that the Bay Area in general has been rapidly developing with a tech boom in the past twenty years or so. What started mostly in San Francisco has spread to a rise in cost of living all throughout the Bay Area, making San Francisco specifically now the most expensive city in the US. This means a large number of new permits for development in the city in response to a massive influx of “outsiders” as any SF born and raised individual could tell you. However, what is not always touched upon as well when looking at the development of SF is the rate of peoples being displaced. San Fransicos is notorious for having a large number of individuals experiencing homeslessness and there is a lot of talk around how this is related to the tech boom, rapid development pricing people out, displacement and gentrification. One of key tools that allows for these things is evictions. Therefore, it is worth exploring the intersection of data around permits in SF and data around evictions in SF to see if there are consistencies with neighborhoods that face massive rates of eviction as well as divestment. 
  
  The data used for these analyses was data taken from DataSF. There were two datasets we focused on. The first was “Building Permits”, and the second was “Total eviction notices by year since 1997”. The building permits dataset contains decades of information, however we only look at data starting around 2000 to present day. It is a pretty boring dataset that goes through the logistical details of each building permit around things like estimated cost, revised cost, number of stories etc. The evictions dataset goes through details like the type of eviction, when it was filed, the address of the residence it was filed at, etc. Because both datasets were collected by the city, how the neighborhoods are defined in terms of boundaries is consistent. The most important part that needs to be noted about this data is that it was collected by the local government and not an outside, unbiased third party. Therefore, like with anything, should it be taken with a grain of salt? As with any situation where data is being observed, the first question that should always be asked is who is collecting the data and why? Could it be serving any private interests and contain bias? With any data, there is always even the slightest inherent bias in data collection, so no dataset, including this one, should be taken without dispute as purely factual.


To look at divestment and evictions, let's first discuss those words and how we are defining them. Divestment in terms of municipal or city development is when one area of a city, in this case we are looking at neighborhoods, is abandoned or neglected. An example of this is the South Bronx in the 1970s. Eviction is defined as the expulsion of a tenant from a property. Another interesting point to how of just how much SF grew shown in Fig. 1 below graph that shows how much money through new developments measured by the money in building permits poured into SF in the neigh of the tech boom. 


